Document Notes API permissions and endpoints (#425)
mautic/developer-documentation-new: docs/rest_api/notes.rst

Notes
#####

> Use this endpoint to manipulate and obtain details on Contact notes in Mautic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use this endpoint to manipulate and obtain details on Contact Notes in Mautic.
```

.. vale off

Permissions
***********

.. vale on

> The Notes API uses the ``lead:notes`` permission set. This permission set is separate from ``lead:leads`` permissions, allowing administrators to grant note-specific access without full Contact access.

Reviewer: The word "Notes" is not Mautic's feature. So, let's use lowercase.

```suggestion
The notes API uses the ``lead:notes`` permission set. This permission set is separate from ``lead:leads`` permissions, allowing administrators to grant note-specific access without full Contact access.
```

> The notes API uses the ``lead:notes`` permission set. This permission set is separate from ``lead:leads`` permissions, allowing administrators to grant note-specific access without full Contact access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Notes API uses the ``lead:notes`` permission set. This permission set is separate from ``lead:leads`` permissions, allowing administrators to grant Note-specific access without full Contact access.
```

> Available permissions:

Author: Permission documentation based on [PR #16067](https://github.com/mautic/mautic/pull/16067) which adds the `lead:notes` permission set via `LeadPermissions.php` using `addExtendedPermissions('notes', false)` - the extended pattern without publish capability.

Source: https://github.com/mautic/mautic/pull/16067

.. list-table::
   :widths: 30 70
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Permission
     - Description
   * - ``lead:notes:viewown``
     - View notes created by the authenticated User
   * - ``lead:notes:viewother``
     - View notes created by other Users
   * - ``lead:notes:editown``
     - Edit notes created by the authenticated User
   * - ``lead:notes:editother``
     - Edit notes created by other Users
   * - ``lead:notes:create``
     - Create new notes
   * - ``lead:notes:deleteown``
     - Delete notes created by the authenticated User
   * - ``lead:notes:deleteother``
     - Delete notes created by other Users
   * - ``lead:notes:full``

>      - Full access to all note operations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * - Permission
     - Description
   * - ``lead:notes:viewown``
     - View Notes created by the authenticated User
   * - ``lead:notes:viewother``
     - View Notes created by other Users
   * - ``lead:notes:editown``
     - Edit Notes created by the authenticated User
   * - ``lead:notes:editother``
     - Edit Notes created by other Users
   * - ``lead:notes:create``
     - Create new Notes
   * - ``lead:notes:deleteown``
     - Delete Notes created by the authenticated User
   * - ``lead:notes:deleteother``
     - Delete Notes created by other Users
   * - ``lead:notes:full``
     - Full access to all Note operations
```

Using the Mautic API library
****************************

> You can interact with this API using the :xref:`Mautic API Library` as below, or the various HTTP endpoints described in this document.

Reviewer: Let's wrap this in vale off/on statements.

```suggestion
.. vale off

You can interact with this API using the :xref:`Mautic API Library` as below, or the various HTTP endpoints described in this document.

.. vale on
```

.. vale on

> You can interact with this API using the :xref:`Mautic API Library` as below, or the various HTTP endpoints described in this document.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. vale off

You can interact with this API using the :xref:`Mautic API Library` as below, or the various HTTP endpoints described in this document.

.. vale on
```

   use Mautic\MauticApi;
   use Mautic\Auth\ApiAuth;

   // ...
   $initAuth = new ApiAuth();
   $auth     = $initAuth->newAuth($settings);
   $apiUrl   = "https://example.com";
   $api      = new MauticApi();
   $noteApi  = $api->newApi("notes", $auth, $apiUrl);

> .. vale off
> 
> Get Note
> ********
> 
> .. vale on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Get note
********
```

> ********

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. vale off

Get Note
********

.. vale on
```

> Retrieves an individual note.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Retrieves an individual Note.
```

> Retrieves an individual note by ID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Retrieves an individual note.
```

.. code-block:: php

   <?php

   //...
   $note = $noteApi->get($id);

.. vale off

HTTP request
============

.. vale on

``GET /notes/ID``

**Required permissions:** ``lead:notes:viewown`` or ``lead:notes:viewother``

> .. _get note response:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. _get Note response:
```

========

> Returns ``200 OK`` when the request successfully retrieves the note.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Returns ``200 OK`` when the request successfully retrieves the note.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. _get note response:

```

> * Returns ``200 OK`` when the request successfully retrieves the note.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Returns ``200 OK`` when the request successfully retrieves the Note.
```

.. code-block:: json

   {
       "note": {
           "id": 1,
           "text": "<p>Jim is super cool!</p>",
           "type": "general",
           "dateTime": "2015-07-23T13:14:00-05:00",
           "lead": {
               "id": 47
           },
           "dateAdded": "2015-07-23T13:14:00-05:00",
           "createdBy": 1,
           "createdByUser": "Joe Smith"
       }
   }

> .. _get note properties:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. _get Note properties:
```

Properties
----------

.. list-table::
   :widths: 25 25 50
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Name
     - Type
     - Description
   * - ``id``
     - integer

>      - ID of the note

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - ID of the Note
```

   * - ``text``
     - string

>      - Body content of the note - supports HTML

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Body content of the Note - supports HTML
```

>      - Type of note - ``general``, ``email``, ``call``, or ``meeting``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Type of note: ``general``, ``email``, ``call``, or ``meeting``
```

     - string

>      - Type of note: ``general``, ``email``, ``call``, or ``meeting``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Type of Note: ``general``, ``email``, ``call``, or ``meeting``
```

   * - ``dateTime``
     - datetime

>      - Date and time associated with the note

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Date and time associated with the Note
```

   * - ``lead``
     - object

>      - The Contact associated with this note

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - The Contact associated with this Note
```

   * - ``dateAdded``
     - datetime
     - Note creation date and time
   * - ``createdBy``
     - integer

>      - ID of the User who created the note

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - ID of the User who created the Note
```

   * - ``createdByUser``
     - string

>      - Name of the User who created the note

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Name of the User who created the Note
```

List notes

> **********

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. vale off

List Notes
**********

.. vale on
```

> .. vale off
> 
> List Notes
> **********
> 
> .. vale on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
List notes
**********
```

> Retrieves a list of notes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Retrieves a list of Notes.
```

Retrieves a list of notes.

.. code-block:: php

   <?php

   //...
   $notes = $noteApi->getList($searchFilter, $start, $limit, $orderBy, $orderByDir);

.. vale off

HTTP request
============

.. vale on

``GET /notes``

**Required permissions:** ``lead:notes:viewown`` or ``lead:notes:viewother``

> **Query parameters**

Reviewer: Let's make this a header for consistency with other pages.

```suggestion
Query parameters
----------------
```

.. list-table::
   :widths: 25 75
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Name
     - Description
   * - ``search``
     - String or search command to filter entities by
   * - ``start``
     - Starting row for the entities returned - defaults to ``0``
   * - ``limit``
     - Limit number of entities to return - defaults to the system configuration for pagination
   * - ``orderBy``
     - Column to sort by - can use any column listed in the response
   * - ``orderByDir``
     - Sort direction - ``asc`` or ``desc``

Response
========

> Returns ``200 OK`` when the request successfully retrieves the list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Returns ``200 OK`` when the request successfully retrieves the list.
```

.. code-block:: json

   {
       "total": 1,
       "notes": [
           {
               "id": 1,
               "text": "<p>Jim is super cool!</p>",
               "type": "general",
               "dateTime": "2015-07-23T13:14:00-05:00",
               "lead": {
                   "id": 47
               }
           }
       ]
   }

> .. vale off
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ***********

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create Note
***********
```

> Create Note
> ***********
> 
> .. vale on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create note
***********
```

> Creates a new note for a Contact.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creates a new Note for a Contact.
```

Creates a new note for a Contact.

.. code-block:: php

   <?php

   $data = [
       'lead' => 47,
       'text' => 'Note content here',
       'type' => 'general',
   ];

   $note = $noteApi->create($data);

.. vale off

HTTP request
============

.. vale on

``POST /notes/new``

**Required permissions:** ``lead:notes:create``

> **Data parameters**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. _create note POST parameters:

POST parameters
---------------
```

> .. _create note POST parameters:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. _create Note POST parameters:
```

POST parameters
---------------

.. list-table::
   :widths: 25 25 50
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Name
     - Required
     - Description
   * - ``lead``
     - Yes

>      - ID of the Contact to associate the note with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - ID of the Contact to associate the Note with
```

   * - ``text``
     - Yes

>      - Body content of the note - supports HTML

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Body content of the Note - supports HTML
```

>      - Type of note - ``general`` (default), ``email``, ``call``, or ``meeting``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Type of note: ``general`` - default, ``email``, ``call``, or ``meeting``
```

     - No

>      - Type of note: ``general`` - default, ``email``, ``call``, or ``meeting``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Type of Note: ``general`` - default, ``email``, ``call``, or ``meeting``
```

   * - ``dateTime``
     - No

>      - Date and time associated with the note - auto-set to current time if not provided

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Date and time associated with the Note - auto-set to current time if not provided
```

========

> Returns ``201 Created`` when the note is successfully created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Returns ``201 Created`` when the note is successfully created.
```

> Same response as :ref:`get Note properties`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response is a JSON object similar to :ref:`Get note <get note response>`.
```

> * Returns ``201 Created`` when the note is successfully created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Returns ``201 Created`` when the Note is successfully created.
```

> .. vale off
> 
> Edit Note
> *********
> 
> .. vale on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Edit note
*********
```

> The response is a JSON object similar to :ref:`Get note <get note response>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response is a JSON object similar to :ref:`Get Note <get Note response>`.
```

> *********

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. vale off

Edit Note
*********

.. vale on
```

> Edits an note. This operation supports ``PUT`` or ``PATCH`` depending on the desired behavior:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Edits an Note. This operation supports ``PUT`` or ``PATCH`` depending on the desired behavior:
```

Edits an existing note. This endpoint supports both ``PUT`` and ``PATCH`` methods.

- ``PUT`` creates a note if it doesn't exist or completely replaces an existing note

> - ``PATCH`` only updates the provided fields on an existing note

Reviewer: Let's keep the consistency with other pages.

```suggestion
Edits an note. 

This operation supports ``PUT`` or ``PATCH`` depending on the desired behavior:

* ``PUT``: **full replacement**. The request creates a new note if the ID is missing. If the ID exists, the request clears all existing data and replaces it with the provided values.
* ``PATCH``: **partial update**. The request only updates field values based on the request data. The request fails when the note ID doesn't exist.
```

> * ``PATCH``: **partial update**. The request only updates field values based on the request data. The request fails when the note ID doesn't exist.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``PUT``: **full replacement**. The request creates a new Note if the ID is missing. If the ID exists, the request clears all existing data and replaces it with the provided values.
* ``PATCH``: **partial update**. The request only updates field values based on the request data. The request fails when the Note ID doesn't exist.
```

.. code-block:: php

   <?php

   $id   = 1;
   $data = [
       'text' => 'Updated note content',
       'type' => 'call',
   ];

   // Using PATCH - update specific fields only
   $note = $noteApi->edit($id, $data);

   // Using PUT - create or completely replace
   $note = $noteApi->edit($id, $data, true);

.. vale off

HTTP request
============

.. vale on

``PATCH /notes/ID/edit``

or

> ``PUT /notes/ID/edit``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``PUT /notes/ID/edit``: updates an existing note or creates a new one when the ID doesn't exist.
* ``PATCH /notes/ID/edit``: updates an existing note. The request fails when the ID doesn't exist.
```

**Required permissions:** ``lead:notes:editown`` or ``lead:notes:editother``

> **Data parameters**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
POST parameters
---------------
```

> Same as :ref:`Create Note <Create Note>`. All fields are optional when using ``PATCH``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Accepts the same parameters as those described in :ref:`Create note <create note POST parameters>`. All parameters are optional.
```

Response
========

> Returns ``200 OK`` when the note is successfully updated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``PUT``: returns ``200 OK`` when the request successfully updates the note or ``201 Created`` when the request creates a note.
* ``PATCH``: returns ``200 OK`` when the request successfully updates the note or ``404 Not Found`` error when the note ID doesn't exist.
```

> Same response as :ref:`get Note properties`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response is a JSON object similar to :ref:`Get note <get note response>`.
```

> .. vale off
> 
> Delete Note
> ***********
> 
> .. vale on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Delete note
***********
```

> * ``PATCH /notes/ID/edit``: updates an existing note. The request fails when the ID doesn't exist.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``PUT /notes/ID/edit``: updates an existing Note or creates a new one when the ID doesn't exist.
* ``PATCH /notes/ID/edit``: updates an existing Note. The request fails when the ID doesn't exist.
```

> Accepts the same parameters as those described in :ref:`Create note <create note POST parameters>`. All parameters are optional.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Accepts the same parameters as those described in :ref:`Create Note <create Note POST parameters>`. All parameters are optional.
```

> The response is a JSON object similar to :ref:`Get note <get note response>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``PUT``: returns ``200 OK`` when the request successfully updates the Note or ``201 Created`` when the request creates a Note.
* ``PATCH``: returns ``200 OK`` when the request successfully updates the Note or ``404 Not Found`` error when the Note ID doesn't exist.

The response is a JSON object similar to :ref:`Get Note <get Note response>`.
```

Deletes a note.

.. code-block:: php

   <?php

   $note = $noteApi->delete($id);

.. vale off

HTTP request
============

.. vale on

``DELETE /notes/ID/delete``

**Required permissions:** ``lead:notes:deleteown`` or ``lead:notes:deleteother``

Response
========

> Returns ``200 OK`` when the note is successfully deleted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Returns ``200 OK`` when the note is successfully deleted.

The response is a JSON object containing the data of the deleted note, similar to :ref:`Get note <get note response>`.
```

> Deletes a note.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. vale off

Delete Note
***********

.. vale on

Deletes a Note.
```

.. code-block:: json

   {
       "note": {
           "id": null,
           "text": "<p>Jim is super cool!</p>",
           "type": "general",
           "dateTime": "2015-07-23T13:14:00-05:00",
           "lead": {
               "id": 47
           }
       }

>    }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Properties
----------

Refer to :ref:`note properties <get note properties>`.
```

> The response is a JSON object containing the data of the deleted note, similar to :ref:`Get note <get note response>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Returns ``200 OK`` when the Note is successfully deleted.

The response is a JSON object containing the data of the deleted Note, similar to :ref:`Get Note <get Note response>`.
```

> Refer to :ref:`note properties <get note properties>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to :ref:`Note properties <get Note properties>`.
```

   * - ``dateTime``
     - datetime
     - Date and time associated with the Note
   * - ``lead``
     - object
     - The Contact associated with this Note
   * - ``dateAdded``
     - datetime
     - Note creation date and time
   * - ``createdBy``
     - integer
     - ID of the User who created the Note
   * - ``createdByUser``
     - string
     - Name of the User who created the Note

.. vale off

List Notes
**********

.. vale on

Retrieves a list of Notes.

.. code-block:: php

   <?php

   //...
   $notes = $noteApi->getList($searchFilter, $start, $limit, $orderBy, $orderByDir);

.. vale off

HTTP request
============

.. vale on

``GET /notes``

**Required permissions:** ``lead:notes:viewown`` or ``lead:notes:viewother``

Query parameters
----------------

.. list-table::
   :widths: 25 75
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Name
     - Description
   * - ``search``
     - String or search command to filter entities by
   * - ``start``
     - Starting row for the entities returned - defaults to ``0``
   * - ``limit``
     - Limit number of entities to return - defaults to the system configuration for pagination
   * - ``orderBy``

>      - Column to sort by - can use any column listed in the response

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Column to sort by. Any column in the response is valid.
       
       **Note**: convert ``camelCase`` properties to ``snake_case``. For example, ``dateAdded`` becomes ``date_added``, ``webhookUrl`` becomes ``webhook_url``, and so on
```

   * - ``orderByDir``
     - Sort direction - ``asc`` or ``desc``

Response
========

> * Returns ``200 OK`` when the request successfully retrieves the list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Returns ``200 OK`` when the request successfully retrieves the Notes list.
```

.. code-block:: json

   {
       "total": 1,
       "notes": [
           {
               "id": 1,
               "text": "<p>Jim is super cool!</p>",
               "type": "general",
               "dateTime": "2015-07-23T13:14:00-05:00",
               "lead": {
                   "id": 47
               }
           }
       ]
   }

> Create Note
> ***********

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. vale off

Create Note
***********

.. vale on
```

.. vale off

HTTP request
============

.. vale on

``GET /notes``

**Required permissions:** ``lead:notes:viewown`` or ``lead:notes:viewother``

Query parameters
----------------

.. list-table::
   :widths: 25 75
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Name
     - Description
   * - ``search``
     - String or search command to filter entities by
   * - ``start``
     - Starting row for the entities returned - defaults to ``0``
   * - ``limit``
     - Limit number of entities to return - defaults to the system configuration for pagination
   * - ``orderBy``
     - Column to sort by - can use any column listed in the response
   * - ``orderByDir``
     - Sort direction - ``asc`` or ``desc``

Response
========

* Returns ``200 OK`` when the request successfully retrieves the list.

.. code-block:: json

   {
       "total": 1,
       "notes": [
           {
               "id": 1,
               "text": "<p>Jim is super cool!</p>",
               "type": "general",
               "dateTime": "2015-07-23T13:14:00-05:00",
               "lead": {
                   "id": 47
               }
           }
       ]
   }

.. vale off

Create note
***********

> .. vale on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Response
========

* ``PUT``: returns ``200 OK`` when the request successfully updates the note or ``201 Created`` when the request creates a note.
* ``PATCH``: returns ``200 OK`` when the request successfully updates the note or ``404 Not Found`` error when the note ID doesn't exist.

The response is a JSON object similar to :ref:`Get note <get note response>`.

.. vale off

Delete note
***********

.. vale on

Deletes a note.

.. code-block:: php

   <?php

   $note = $noteApi->delete($id);

.. vale off

HTTP request
============

.. vale on

``DELETE /notes/ID/delete``

**Required permissions:** ``lead:notes:deleteown`` or ``lead:notes:deleteother``

Response
========

* Returns ``200 OK`` when the note is successfully deleted.

The response is a JSON object containing the data of the deleted note, similar to :ref:`Get note <get note response>`.

.. code-block:: json

   {
       "note": {
           "id": null,
           "text": "<p>Jim is super cool!</p>",
           "type": "general",
           "dateTime": "2015-07-23T13:14:00-05:00",
           "lead": {
               "id": 47
           }
       }

>    }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
